[Music]
uh
male gliding leaf frogs leap
from the treetops
[Music]
to slow their descent they use their
huge webbed feet
as parachutes
[Music]
these large tree frogs spend most of
their lives in the high canopy
and only come down when it's time to
breed
once settled they begin to serenade
their unseen
females
now it's time for the females to make
their move
there's no shortage of suitors but this
female
has already made her choice she's
heading towards the loudest core
because loud calls come from big frogs
and big is best but to reach him she
must run the gauntlet of a gang of
smaller suitors
their only chance of mating is to make a
sneaky
interception
he's scored but with more females
arriving all the time
it's not over until the fat frog stops
singing
[Music]
feet so vital for gliding are now put
to other uses
two's company three is inconvenient
but in any case all male frogs are
equipped with dry
thumbs which enable them to get a
vice-like grip
on their moist partners
it's a case of first come first served
living in such a humid environment means
jungle frogs are less tied to puddles
and pools
and these even lay their eggs out of
water
there's little chance of them drying out
and up here
they're safer from predators the big
storm is the cue for the most important
climb
of this frog's life
it's a male in search of a mate
[Music]
but if he is to find one he has to get
to the top
[Applause]
[Music]
three
he needs to keep his wits about him for
the rain also brings out hunters
[Music]
easy does it
the top at last
but he's late to the
the party a male sits the further his
voice will carry
so the top slots are worth fighting for
[Music]
sleeping
and he's won he has the top place
so now it's time to sing
and a white-bellied female responds
they joined together to mate
the loser will have to wait for the next
storm
before he sings again
she lays her eggs on a blade of a long
leaf
and he using his back legs folds it over
and glues its two edges together
shutting the eggs
inside
this sealed nest is the safest place
these leaf folding frogs can find
to protect their precious brood
at the first floral beacons of spring
triggering
a rampage of wildflowers an increasingly
rare sight
in the rest of agricultural europe
[Music]
do
mediterranean catchflight forms pink
sauces around the corcoa trunks
the evergreen umbrella-like canopy
provides welcome shade for these
light-sensitive flowers
[Music]
unlike so much of europe there's hardly
any chemical runoff from the surrounding
land
so spring rains replenish the streams
and ponds with beautifully
clean water which is good news for the
pollution-sensitive animals
like amphibians
these are male marsh frogs trying to
attract females
and establish a territory
in the slower moving rivers and pools
throughout alentejo
striped neck terrapins are abundant
like all reptiles terrapins are
cold-blooded
and need to absorb heat by basking on
suitable rocks
throughout early spring barn swallows
use the mud they collect from the
margins of the pond
to construct and repair their nests
marsh frogs are not the only noisy
amphibian here stripeless tree frogs are
also
common they reserve their mating chorus
until nightfall
this
during the night a male iberian midwife
toad has kept a chain of eggs
moist in the pool wrapped around his
hind legs they shackle the toad for six
weeks until hatching
before dawn he'll find a damp cool
shelter to prevent the eggs from drying
out
salamanders hunt for invertebrate prey
throughout the night
with its striking yellow and red
markings this
is a rare subspecies found only here
it will also hide up during the day
as to will the spade foot toad
using its shovel-like rear feet and
corkscrew body movement
the toad buries itself in the soft soil
of the cork forest before the end of the
night
during all the time i was in japan there
was one place that caught my imagination
more than anywhere else
a small island called yakushima probably
the most biologically diverse place in
this entire country certainly the most
exciting destination for a naturalist
but i never quite got the chance to come
here
until now
[Music]
yakushima is an island pretty much
defined by rainfall
this is the soggiest place in all of
japan in fact the locals have a saying
that on yakishima it rains 35 days a
month
that being the case though the
landscapes endlessly
rich and green and alive rent through
streams of crystal clarity
and it hasn't rained today yet
this divine mossy forest
is a botanist stream it's almost like a
film set really with
all the trees draped in epiphytes and
vines
every piece of dead wood or tree root is
covered with at least four or five
different species of moss
peppered through with fruiting bodies
you sort of expect to find some mystical
creature hiding behind each one
the architecture of this forest changes
as you climb higher
along the mountain trails with giant
yakishima cedars like mighty pillars
dominating the canopy
the ancient cedars found on this island
some of the most fascinating trees in
the world
they look as if they've been sculpted by
some truly tormented mind
this one here is less than a thousand
years old they can get to be at least
twice that age the woods have such high
quality so full of resin
but even a couple of hundred years after
the tree dies the stump
can actually prove a seeding ground for
a fresh tree
locals call trees like this kosugi which
means youngster
even so this one was around before the
time of the samurai but now it's
much more than just a tree there's
epiphytes other small trees and moss is
all growing off the main trunk
it's a whole living community
and that's just the plants if it was
warmer
it would be crawling with life but for
now the subtropical heat
seems to have deserted us
oh i've got a frog little
rain frog look
yakushima's absolutely perfect habitat
for frogs it's damp it's green there's
lots of food
and i'd actually expect it to be seeing
an awful lot more than we have done
but it's a lot cooler than we were
expecting this
rain frog will have spent the coldest
part of the year the winter
hibernating under this rock but now it's
springtime pretty soon they'll be
thinking about coming out
looking for a mate
it's the roger brooks bird wing it's got
the most impressive wingspan
these are incredibly rare here the
simple fact that they're
so beautiful that collectors will pay
immense prices for them
apparently if you can get a live
specimen to japan they've been worth
about as much as a thousand us dollars
each
they're far better out here on the wing
the steep canyon sides are home to some
very specialized creatures
this frog has evolved to live on
slippery waterfall rocks
and is an expert at avoiding capture
professor tyrone hayes has been chasing
frogs since he was a child
he's going to go straight into the
waterfall again
what it does is it leaps into the
waterfall to escape predators
or scientists that want to collect it
and that's exactly what he did rather
than
jump back he went straight over to
boulder
hammerhead flatworm
with time running out gordon is using
technology to help the search for
species
it's a video camera trap that captures
animals 24 hours a day
if it's put in the right spot
what's running knowledge of the animals
is much more important than your actual
knowledge of equipment because
you've got a manual that you can open up
and if you've got half a brain in your
head you can work out
what a piece of equipment does but with
animals you've got to
or with making wildlife films you've got
to have an understanding of the animals
good luck the camera trap is on a
natural hilltop trail he believes
animals regularly use
with two days to go a mysterious sound
has been heard
far away down the valley the haunting
call
of the orangutan
now with forest destruction truly wild
orangutans
are very rare and notoriously shy of
humans
these irangs were filmed in a
well-established nature reserve
where they're used to the presence of
humans
to find a population in impact would be
a major breakthrough
this call is the first evidence that
iran's live in the canyon
justine is off in pursuit she follows
the river all the way down to the edge
of the canyon
we didn't think there were rangs around
here at all we haven't found any around
our camp
no signs no nests nothing so this is a
bit further afield
we've followed the impact down and um
you know there's
definitely rang around here so that's
great maybe there's more than one
who knows but she's probably on some
sort of circuit
and she'll come back she's this has got
fruit on it
the remains of the orangu's favorite
food figs
lie all around quite a perfume smell
very soft
justine decides to use the highest tree
in the area as a lookout post
[Music]
i could hear
they're proving elusive so far
fingers crossed today will be the day or
they'd just be
stingless bees to annoy me and that's it
you